IBX-8689: AI Actions documentation (#2473)
ibexa/documentation-developer: docs/ai_actions/ai_actions_guide.md

- [Generate alternative text](#generating-alternative-text): Generate alt text for accessibility purposes

![AI Actions schematic](img/guide_ai_actions.png)

You can extend its capabilities beyond the default setup by creating custom connector modules, allowing users to integrate additional AI services or customize the way data is processed and interpreted.
For example, it could transform images, or generate illustrations for your articles based on their contents.
The possibilities are endless and you're not limited to a specific AI service, avoiding vendor lock-in.

## Availability

AI Actions are an opt-in capability available as an LTS Update to the v4.6.x version of [[= product_name =]], regardless of its edition.
To begin using AI Actions, you must first [install the required packages and perform initial configuration](install_ai_actions.md).

!!! note "API Key"

    The OpenAI connector requires that you first [get an API key](https://help.openai.com/en/articles/4936850-where-do-i-find-my-openai-api-key) and make sure that you [set up a billing method](https://help.openai.com/en/articles/9038407-how-can-i-set-up-billing-for-my-account).

## How it works

> AI Actions LTS update is built upon the PHP framework.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI Actions LTS update comes with an extensible AI framework written in PHP.
```

---
description: AI Actions LTS update helps editors by automating repetitive tasks.
month_change: true
---

# AI Actions product guide

## What are AI Actions

> When you look around, artificial intelligence becomes more and more important by enhancing user interaction and automating complex processes.

Author: ```suggestion
Wherever you look, artificial intelligence becomes more and more important by enhancing user interaction and automating complex processes.
```

## How it works

AI Actions LTS update relies on an extensible AI framework, which is responsible for gathering information from various sources, such as AI action types, AI action configurations, and contextual details like SiteAccess, user details, locale settings, and more.
This data can then be combined with user input.
It's then passed to a service connector, such as the default OpenAI connector, for final processing on [[= product_name =]] side.
The service connector wraps all data into a prompt or another suitable format and sends it to an external AI service.

When the AI Service returns a response, the response goes back through the service connector and passes to the framework.
It can then be presented to the user in any way necessary.

### Core concepts

#### AI service

AI service is a third party platform that provides access to artificial intelligence tools and capabilities.
It executes tasks that it receives through a service connector.

#### Action

> Actions are tasks or functions that executed by an external AI service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Actions are tasks or functions that are executed by an external AI service.
```

> Actions are tasks or functions that the AI service is set to perform.

Reviewer 2: Not really: the actions are executed by _using_ the AI services

Action types define what kind of task the AI service performs, while AI action configurations specify how the task should be executed.
This clear separation allows for a flexible system where actions can be created, managed, and customized with minimal effort.

#### AI action type

> In simple words, AI action types are high level templates predefined by developers.

Reviewer 2: It would probably be worth mentioning somewhere that action types are primarily made of:
- an identifier
- a set of input parameters
- a set of output fields
- an action (text-to-image, video-to-text, ...)

> AI action types are templates predefined by developers.

Reviewer 2: It is crucial to define Action types as being high level. They match _users tasks_. Image to text isn't an action type, it's a handler (sorta). We need to give examples such as Generate the alternative text of an image.

Reason: the UI component is set to one particular action type, and that it will list _all_ the actions configured for that action type.

> AI action types correspond to tasks that users intend to perform when they interact with the interface.

Reviewer 2: Great choice with "intend" 👍

It might involve setting specific parameters used by the AI service, a response length, an expense limit, or configuring how the output should be handled.
By making such adjustments, administrators can ensure that the actions are tailored to meet the needs of your organization.

#### Model

Once an AI action is defined and configured, it must be executed, and this is where models come into play.
Each model is designed to work with a specific AI service and AI action type pair.
Pieces of PHP code that are responsible for resolving a model are called handlers.
They may include hardcoded prompts for conversational AI services like ChatGPT, or operate without prompts in the case of other types of AI.
Handlers take parameters defined in the AI action type and configuration, combine it with user input and any predefined settings or prompts, and pass this information to the AI service for processing.

### Triggering actions from the UI

Among other elements, AI Actions LTS update includes UI components for:

- AI action management in the **Admin** panel
- text modification in online editor

> - alt-text generation feature in the image management modal

Reviewer 2: The UI component isn't really _for_ specific actions, it's meant for all of them. Custom action types should be able to benefit from it as well (unless there are limitations @micszo ?)

Author: I reworded it slightly to say that these components are used in ...
It does not mean they are exclusively intended for this use, they could be adapted for other uses.

Built upon the PHP framework, AI Actions offer an extensible solution for integrating services provided by AI engines into your workflows, all managed through a user-friendly interface.

You can extend the add-on and make it do different things, for example, transform text passages, or generate illustrations for your articles based on a prompt.
The possibilities are endless.

## Availability

AI Actios are available as an add-on to the v.4.6.x version of [[= product_name =]], regardless of its edition.
To use it's capabilities you must install the package and perform initial configuration.

## How it works

### The core concepts

#### Actions

Actions are tasks or functions that the AI is set to perform.
Each Action is a combination of an action type and an action configuration.
Action types define what kind of task the AI will perform, while the action configuration specifies how the task should be executed.
This clear separation allows for a flexible system where actions can be easily created, managed, and customized.

#### Action types

Action types are predefined by developers within YAML configuration.

> Each action type defines the structure and nature of the task that the AI engine performs.

Author: ```suggestion
Each action type defines the structure and nature of the task that the AI service performs.
```

Action types could be designed to generate alt text for images, summarize a passage of text, or even translate content into another language.
By defining action types in YAML, developers can create a wide range of functionalities that can be easily deployed within the application.

#### Action configurations

AAction configurations let administrators employ action types to generate actions.
Action configurations are managed in the [Admin Panel](admin_panel.md), and allow administrators to customize and fine-tune the behavior of each action.
This might involve setting parameters for the AI, defining specific inputs, or configuring how the output should be handled.
By adjusting these configurations, administrators can ensure that the actions are tailored to meet their requirements.

#### Handlers

Once an action is defined and configured, it must be executed, and this is where handlers come into play.
Handlers are pieces of PHP code that are responsible for resolving an action.

> Each handler is designed to work with a specific AI engine and action type pair.
> Handlers may include hardcoded prompts for conversational AI engines like ChatGPT, or they may operate without prompts for other types of AI.
> Handlers take configurations defined in the action type and action configuration, combine it with user input and any predefined settings or prompts, and pass this information to the AI engine for processing.

Author: ```suggestion
Each handler is designed to work with a specific AI service and action type pair.
Handlers may include hardcoded prompts for conversational AI services like ChatGPT, or they may operate without prompts for other types of AI.
Handlers take configurations defined in the action type and action configuration, combine it with user input and any predefined settings or prompts, and pass this information to the AI service for processing.
```

### Triggering actions from the UI

Among other components, AI Actions add-on brings action management in Admin Panel and alt-text generation feature in image management UI.
Both these areas are user-friendly and well integrated with the application’s UI.
Administrators can manage atcion configurations with ease, while end-users can trigger actions by simply clicking a button. 
Processes are straightforward and intuitive, ensuring that users can quickly and easily achieve their desired outcomes.

### Triggering actions programmatically

AI Actions add-on exposes an API that allows for programmatic execution of actions.
With the API, developers can automate tasks and execute actions on batches of content by integrating them into workflows.
By issuing commands through the API, developers can trigger actions based on external events:
...

## Capabilities and use cases

### Management

...

### Extensibility

Built-in action types offer a good starting point, but the real power of AI Actions lies in extensibility.
Extending AI Actions opens up new possibilities for content management and editing.

> Developers can extend the feature by adding new action types that use existing AI engines or even integrating additional AI services.
> This involves defining a new action type in YAML, writing a handler that communicates with the new service or engine, and creating a form for configuring the options that extends the action configuration form shown in the Admin Panel.

Author: ```suggestion
Developers can extend the feature by adding new action types that use existing AI services or even integrating additional ones.
This involves defining a new action type in YAML, writing a handler that communicates with the new service, and creating a form for configuring the options that extends the action configuration form shown in the Admin Panel.
```

> For example, a developer could write a handler that uses an AI service to shorten or expand text passages, or generate illustrations based on a body of an article.

Author: ```suggestion
For example, a developer could write a handler that uses an AI service to generate complete articles based on a short description, or illustrations based on a body of an article.
```

### Use cases

#### ...

#### Generating Alt Text

Out of the box, the [[= product_name_base =]] AI Actions add-on comes with the generating alt text for images capability.
Organizations can benefit from it's use by improving accessibility and SEO.
Once the feature is configured, editors can generate alt text for images they upload to the system by clicking one button, while administrators can use the API to run a batch process against a larger collection of illustrations.

> Before you can start generating alt text, some preliminary setup is required, which includes configuring access to an AI engine.

Author: ```suggestion
Before you can start generating alt text, some preliminary setup is required, which includes configuring access to an AI service.
```
